INSTALL.md, before:

# Installation

There are multiple ways to install ifsbench:
- via `pip install` as a pure Python package
- via CMake/ecbuild to enable installation as part of a CMake project

## Requirements

- Python 3.8+ with virtualenv and pip

## Installation without prior download

The easiest way to obtain a useable installation of ifsbench does not
require downloading the source code. Simply run the following commands:

```bash
python3 -m venv ifsbench_env  # Create a virtual environment
source ifsbench_env/bin/activate  # Activate the virtual environment

# Installation of the ifsbench core library
pip install "ifsbench @ git+https://github.com/ecmwf-ifs/ifsbench.git"
```

This makes the Python package available and installs the `ifs-bench.py` script.


## Installation from source

After downloading the source code, e.g., via

```bash
git clone https://github.com/ecmwf-ifs/ifsbench.git
```

enter the created source directory and choose one of the following installation methods.

### Installation with pip

```bash
python3 -m venv ifsbench_env  # Create a virtual environment
source ifsbench_env/bin/activate  # Activate the virtual environment

# Installation of the ifsbench core library
# Optional:
#   * Add `-e` to obtain an editable install that allows modifying the
#     source files without having to re-install the package
#   * Enable the following options by providing them as a comma-separated
#     list in square brackets behind the `.`:
#     * tests    - allows running the ifsbench test suite
#     * grib     - installs dependencies to read/modify GRIB files
pip install .
```

### Installation using CMake/ecbuild

ifsbench can be installed using [ecbuild](https://github.com/ecmwf/ecbuild) (a set of CMake macros and a wrapper around CMake). 
This requires ecbuild 3.4+ and CMake 3.17+.

```bash
ecbuild <path-to-ifsbench>
make
```

The following options are available and can be enabled/disabled by providing `-DENABLE_<feature>=<ON|OFF>`:

- `EDITABLE` (default: `OFF`): Install ifsbench in editable mode, i.e. without
  copying any files
- `GRIB` (default: `OFF`): Install additional libraries that are required for 
  reading/ modifying GRIB files.

This method is also suitable to create a system-wide installation of ifsbench:

```bash
mkdir build && cd build
ecbuild --prefix=<install-path> <path-to-ifsbench>
make install
```

The ecbuild installation method creates a virtual environment in the build
directory.

## Installation as part of an ecbundle bundle

ifsbench being installable by CMake/ecbuild makes it easy to integrate with
[ecbundle](https://github.com/ecmwf/ecbundle). Simply add the following to your
`bundle.yml`:

```yaml
projects :

  # ...other projects ...

  - ifsbench :
    git     : https://github.com/ecmwf-ifs/ifsbench
    version : main
```

Commit message:

Add populate script (#94)
* python_venv: also set Python3_ROOT_DIR to venv

* populate: add populate script to download python wheels

* Add error handling to python wheel download

* ci: add pytest-cmake entry and does a cmake installation using the
populate script

* ci: remove code coverage for pytest-cmake

* ci: do cmake builds both with and without populate

INSTALL.md, after:

# Installation

There are multiple ways to install ifsbench:
- via `pip install` as a pure Python package
- via CMake/ecbuild to enable installation as part of a CMake project

## Requirements

- Python 3.8+ with virtualenv and pip

## Installation without prior download

The easiest way to obtain a useable installation of ifsbench does not
require downloading the source code. Simply run the following commands:

```bash
python3 -m venv ifsbench_env  # Create a virtual environment
source ifsbench_env/bin/activate  # Activate the virtual environment

# Installation of the ifsbench core library
pip install "ifsbench @ git+https://github.com/ecmwf-ifs/ifsbench.git"
```

This makes the Python package available and installs the `ifs-bench.py` script.


## Installation from source

After downloading the source code, e.g., via

```bash
git clone https://github.com/ecmwf-ifs/ifsbench.git
```

enter the created source directory and choose one of the following installation methods.

### Installation with pip

```bash
python3 -m venv ifsbench_env  # Create a virtual environment
source ifsbench_env/bin/activate  # Activate the virtual environment

# Installation of the ifsbench core library
# Optional:
#   * Add `-e` to obtain an editable install that allows modifying the
#     source files without having to re-install the package
#   * Enable the following options by providing them as a comma-separated
#     list in square brackets behind the `.`:
#     * tests    - allows running the ifsbench test suite
#     * grib     - installs dependencies to read/modify GRIB files
pip install .
```

### Installation using CMake/ecbuild

ifsbench can be installed using [ecbuild](https://github.com/ecmwf/ecbuild) (a set of CMake macros and a wrapper around CMake). 
This requires ecbuild 3.4+ and CMake 3.17+.

```bash
ecbuild <path-to-ifsbench>
make
```

The following options are available and can be enabled/disabled by providing `-DENABLE_<feature>=<ON|OFF>`:

- `EDITABLE` (default: `OFF`): Install ifsbench in editable mode, i.e. without
  copying any files
- `GRIB` (default: `OFF`): Install additional libraries that are required for 
  reading/ modifying GRIB files.

This method is also suitable to create a system-wide installation of ifsbench:

```bash
mkdir build && cd build
ecbuild --prefix=<install-path> <path-to-ifsbench>
make install
```

The ecbuild installation method creates a virtual environment in the build
directory.

### Offline installation

An offline installation of ifsbench requires the Python dependencies to be prepopulated. This can be done via the 
provided `populate` script, e.g.:

```
IFSBENCH_WHEEL_ARCH=manylinux_2_17_x86_64 IFSBENCH_WHEEL_PYTHON_VERSION=310 ./populate
```

The above will download python wheels compatible with most linux systems and for python version 3.10 to `<source-dir>/artifacts.`.
If those environment variables are ommitted then the wheels are download for the system used to run the populate script. A normal
CMake/ecbuild installation can now be carried out, with one additional argument: `-DARTIFACTS_DIR=<path-to-artifacts-dir>`.

## Installation as part of an ecbundle bundle

ifsbench being installable by CMake/ecbuild makes it easy to integrate with
[ecbundle](https://github.com/ecmwf/ecbundle). Simply add the following to your
`bundle.yml`:

```yaml
projects :

  # ...other projects ...

  - ifsbench :
    git     : https://github.com/ecmwf-ifs/ifsbench
    version : main
```
